IIW Fatigue Recommendations XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                   June 2005


 welds at free, unsupported plates.

The extent of the finite element model has to be chosen such that constraining boundary
 effects of the structural detail analysed are comparable to the acutal structure.

Models with thin plate or shell elements or alternatively with solid elements may be used. It
 should be noted that on the one hand the arrangement and the type of the elements have to
 allow for steep stress gradients as well as for the formation of plate bending, and on the other
 hand, only the linear stress distribution in the plate thickness direction needs to be evaluated
 with respect to the definition of the structural hot spot stress. The stresses should be
 determined at the specified reference points.

 For FEM analysis, sufficient expertise of the analyst is required. Guidance is given in [2-3].
 In the following, only some rough recommendations are given:

 In a plate or shell element model (Fig. (2.2)-11, left part), the elements have to be arranged
 in the mid-plane of the structural components. 8-noded elements are recommended
 particularly in case of steep stress gradients. In simplified models, the welds are not
 modelled, except for cases where the results are affected by local bending, e. g. due to an
 offset between plates or due to the small distance between adjacent welds. Here, the welds
may be included by vertical or inclined plate elements having appropriate stiffness or by
 introducing constraint equations or rigid links to couple node displacements.

An alternative particularly for complex cases is recommended using prismatic solid elements
which have a displacement function allowing steep stress gradients as well as plate bending
 with linear stress distribution in the plate thickness direction. This is offered, e. g., by
 isoparametric 20-node elements with mid-side nodes at the edges, which allow only one
 element to be arranged in the plate thickness direction due to the quadratic displacement
 function and the linear stress distribution. At a reduced integration, the linear part of the
 stresses can be directly evaluated. Modelling of welds is generally recommended as shown
 in fig. (2.2)-11 (right part).

The element lengths are determined by the reference points for the subsequent extrapolation.
 In order to avoid an influence of the stress singularity, the stress closest to the hot spot is
 usually evaluated at the first or second nodal point. Therefore, the length of the element at
 the hot spot has to correspond at least to its distance from the first reference point. Coarser
meshes are possible with higher-order elements and fixed lengths, as further explained
 below.

 Appropriate element widths are important particularly in cases with steep stress gradients.
The width of the solid element or the two shell elements in front of the attachment should not
 exceed the attachment width 'w', i. e. the attachment thickness plus two weld leg lengths. See
 also figure (2.2)-11.




                                     page 29
