IIW Fatigue Recommendations  XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                 February 2005

3.7 FATIGUE RESISTANCE DETERMINATION BY TE-
STING

3.7.1 General Considerations

Fatigue tests may be used to establish a fatigue resistance curve for a component or a structural
detail, or the resistance of a material against (non critical) cyclic crack propagation.

Statistical methods offer three ways of testing a limited number of samples from a larger
population:
                    1.  a specimen to failure
                    2.  first specimen to failure
                    3. p specimens to failure amongst n specimens

It is recommended that test results are obtained at constant stress ratios R. The S-N data should
be presented in a graph showing log(endurance in cycles) as the abscissa and log(range of
fatigue actions) as the ordinate. For crack propagation data, the log(stress intensity factor range)
should be the abscissa and the log(crack propagation rate per cycle) the ordinate.

Experimental fatigue data are scattered, the extent of scatter tends to be greatest in the low
stress/low crack propagation regime (e.g. see fig. (3.7)-1). For statistical evaluation, a Gaussian
log-normal distribution should be assumed. The number of failed test specimens should be equal
or greater than 10. For other conditions, special
statistical considerations are required.

Many methods  of  statistical  evaluation  are
available. However, the most common approach
for analysing fatigue data is to fit S-N or crack
propagation curves by regression analysis, ta-
king log(N) or log(da/dN) as the dependent va-
riable. Then, characteristic values are establi-
shed by adopting curves lying k standard devia-
tions of the dependent variable from the mean
(values are given in 6.4.1). In the case of S-N
                                                 Fig. (3.7)-1 Scatterband in SN curvedata, this would be below the mean, while the
curve above the mean would be appropriate in
case of crack propagation data.

Thus, more precisely, test results should analysed to produce characteristic values (subscript
k). These are values at a 95% survival probability (i.e. 5% failure probability) associated with
a two-sided 75% confidence level of the mean.

More details on the use of the confidence level and formulae are given in appendix 6.4.


3.7.2 Evaluation of Test Data

                                    page 91
