IIW Fatigue Recommendations XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                   June 2005

1 GENERAL


The IIW, every other body or person involved in the preparation and publication of this
document hereby expressly disclaim any liability or responsibility for loss or damage
 resulting from its use, for any violation of any mandatory regulation with which the
document may conflict, or for the infringement of any patent resulting from the use of this
 document.

 It is the user's responsibility to ensure that the recommendations given here are
 suitable for his/her intended purposes.

1.1 INTRODUCTION

The aim of these recommendations is to provide a basis for the design and analysis of welded
components loaded by fluctuating forces, to avoid failure by fatigue. In addition they may
 assist other bodies who are establishing fatigue design codes. It is assumed that the user has
 a working knowlegde of the basics of fatigue and fracture mechanics.

The purpose of designing a structure against the limit state due to fatigue damage is to
 ensure, with an adequate survival probability, that the performance is satisfactory during the
 design life. The required survival probability is obtained by the use of appropriate partial
 safety factors.

1.2 SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS

The recommendations present general methods for the assessment of fatigue damage in
welded components, which may affect the limit states of a structure, such as ultimate limit
 state and servicability limit state [1-1].

The recommendations give fatigue resistance data for welded components made of wrought
 or extruded products of ferritic/pearlitic or bainitic structural steels up to fy=960 MPa, of
 austenitic stainless steels and of aluminium alloys commonly used for welded structures.

The recommendations are not applicable to low cycle fatigue, where )Fnom>1.5Afy  ,
 maxFnom>fy ,  for corrosive conditions or for elevated temperature operation in the creep
 range.





                                      page 7
