IIW Fatigue Recommendations XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                   June 2005


 Stress cycle          A part of a stress history containing a stress maximum and a
                                 stress minimum, determined usually by a range counting
                          method.

 Stress history         A time based presentation of a fluctuating stress, defined by
                              sequential stress peaks and troughs (valleys), either for the
                                  total life or for a certain sample.
 Stress intensity
 factor                  Main parameter in fracture mechanics, the combined effect of
                                 stress and crack size at the crack tip region.

 Stress range              The difference between stress maximum and stress minimum
                               in a stress cycle, the most important parameter governing
                               fatigue life.

 Stress range block       A part of the total spectrum of stress ranges which is discreti-
                          zed in a certain number of blocks.

 Stress range exceedances   A  tabular  or  graphical  presentation  of the cumulative
                            frequency of stress range exceedances, i.e the number of ran-
                            ges exceeding a particular magnitude of stress range in a
                                 stress history. Here, frequency is the number of occurrances.
                           (Also  referred  to  as  "stress  spectrum"  or  "cumulative
                            frequency diagram").

 Stress range occurrences   A tabular or graphical presentation of stress ranges, usually
                               discretized in stress range blocks. See also "stress range
                            exceedances".

 Stress ratio                 Ratio of minimum to maximum algebraic value of the stress in
                            a particular stress cycle.

 Stress intensity factor ratio   Ratio of minimum to maximum algebraic value of the stress
                                intensity factor of a particular load cycle.

 Structural discontinuity    A geometric discontinuity due to the type of welded joint,
                              usually to be found in the tables of classified structural details.
                        The effects of a structural discontinuity are (i) concentration
                             of the membrane stress and (ii) formation of secondary shell
                           bending stresses (see fig. (2.2)-6).

 Structural stress        A stress in a component, resolved taking into account the
                                effects of a structural discontinuity, and consisting of mem-
                            brane and shell bending stress components. Also referred to as
                            geometric stress.


                                     page 11
