IIW Fatigue Recommendations XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                   June 2005


2.2.4 Effective Notch Stress

 2.2.4.1 General

 Effective notch stress is the total stress at the root of a notch, obtained assuming linear-elastic
 material behaviour. To take account of the statistical nature and scatter of weld shape
 parameters, as well as of the non-linear material behaviour at the notch root, the real weld
 contour is replaced by an effective one. For structural steels and aluminium an effective
 notch root radius of  r = 1 mm  has been verified to give consistent results. For fatigue
 assessment, the effective notch stress is compared with a common fatigue resistance curve.

The method is restricted to welded joints which are expected to fail from the weld toe or
weld root. Other causes of fatigue failure, e.g. from surface roughness or embedded defects,
 are not covered. Also it is also not applicable where considerable stress components parallel
 to the weld or parallel to the root gap exist.

The method is also restricted to assessment of naturally formed weld toes and roots. At
machined or ground welds, toes or roots shall be assessed using the notch stress and the
 fatigue resistance value of a butt weld groud flush to plate.

The method is well suited to the comparison of alternative weld geometries. Unless
 otherwise specified, flank angles of 30° for butt welds and 45° for fillet welds are suggested.

 In cases where a mean geometrical notch root radius can be defined, e.g. after certain post
weld improvement procedures, this geometrical radius plus 1 mm may be used in the
 effective notch stress analysis.

The method is limited to thicknesses t >= 5 mm. For smaller wall thicknesses, the method
 has not yet been verified.


 2.2.4.2 Calculation of Effective Notch Stress

 Effective notch stresses or stress concentration factors can be calculated by parametric
 formulae, taken from diagrams or calculated from finite element or boundary element
 models. The effective notch radius is introduced such that the tip of the radius touches the
 root of the real notch, e.g. the end of an unwelded root gap.





                                     page 35
