IIW Fatigue Recommendations  XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                 February 2005


Increase of general stress level

       This is the effect of all types of misalignment due to secondary bending. The additional
        effective stress concentration factor can be calculated by appropriate formulae. The
        fatigue resistance of the structural detail under consideration is to be lowered by division
      by this factor.

Local notch effect

       Here, interaction with other notches present in the welded joint is decisive. Two cases
        are to be distinguished:

       Additive notch effect

         If the location of the notch due to the the weld imperfection coincides with a structural
        discontinuity associated with the geometry of the weld shape (e.g. weld toe), then the
        fatigue resistance of the welded joint is decreased by the additive notch effect. This may
       be the case at weld shape imperfections.

       Competitive notch effect

         If the location of the notch due to the weld imperfection does not coincide with a
        structural geometry associated with the shape geometry of the weld, the notches are in
       competition. Both notches are assessed separately. The notch giving the lowest fatigue
        resistance is governing.

Cracklike imperfections

       Planar discontinuities, such as cracks or cracklike imperfections, which require only a
        short period for crack initiation, are assessed using fracture mechanics on the basis that
        their fatigue lives consist entirely of crack propagation.

After inspection and detection of a weld imperfection, the first step of the assessment procedure
is to determine the type and the effect of the imperfection as given here.

If a weld imperfection cannot be clearly associated to a type or an effect of imperfections listed
here, it is recommended that it is assumed to be cracklike.





                                    page 96
