IIW Fatigue Recommendations  XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                 February 2005

4.3 FATIGUE ASSESSMENT USING S-N CURVES

Fatigue verification is carried out using

       the design spectrum of fatigue actions in terms of stress ranges )Fi,S,d, in which the
        stresses of the characteristic spectrum )Fi,S,k have been multiplied by the partial safety
        factor (F for fatigue actions.
and
       the design resistance S-N curve based on design resistance stresses )FR,d, in which the
        characteristic resistance stress ranges )FR,k have been divided by the partial safety factor
     (M for fatigue resistance.

The design resistance S-N curve may be modified further according to the needs of the damage
calculation procedure.

For constant amplitude loading, the characteristic stress range )FR,k at the required number of
stress cycles is firstly determined. Secondly the fatigue criterion is checked:





At variable amplitude loading, cumulative damage calculation procedure is applied. Usually
a modified "Palmgren-Miner"-rule, as described in 4.3.1, is appropriate. For load spectra which
are sensitive to the position of the fatigue limit or cut-off limit, or in which the spectrum changes
during the service time, additional assessment using the nonlinear damage calculation method
described in 4.3.2 is recommended.

In fields of application, where no test data nor service experience exist and the shape of the
stress spectrum is not close to constant amplitude, it is recommended to proceed according to the
calculation given in in 4.3.1.


4.3.1 Linear Damage Calculation by "Palmgren-Miner" Summation

If the maximum design stress range )Fmax,S,d of the load spectrum is lower than the assumed
design fatigue limit )FL,R,d of the design fatigue resistance S-N curve, the life of the welded joint
can be assumed to be infinite and no further damage calculation is necessary. This procedure is
not recommended at aluminium and at steel under very high cycles (see chapter 3.2)

The fatigue resistance curve has to be modified according to fig. (4)-1 and (4)-2. Then the slope
m2 of the S-N curve at higher cycles than the knee point is assumed to be m2 = 2A m1 - 1 [30] .


For fatigue verification it has to be shown that:




                                    page 108
