IIW Fatigue Recommendations XIII-1965-03/XV-1127-03                   June 2005


 According to the ISO format for verification of structures [1-1], fatigue action and fatigue
 resistance are clearly separated. Fatigue resistance is given in terms of tentative data. The
 representation of tentative data has also been separated from the assessment curves used for
damage calculation, because different damage calculation methods may require special
 modifications to the resistance S-N curve, which is usually based on constant amplitude tests.
 Thus, the flexibility and possibility for continuous updating of the document is maintained.


No recommendations are given for the fatigue load (action) side, nor for the partial safety
 factor on fatigue actions (F.

The different approaches for the fatigue assessment of welded joints and components
 considered are: nominal stress, hot-spot structural stress, effective notch stress, fracture
 mechanics method and component testing.

1.6 NECESSITY FOR FATIGUE ASSESSMENT

 Fatigue assessment is generally required for components subject to fluctuating loads.

 In the following cases, detailed fatigue assessment usually is not required:

        a)    The highest nominal design stress range satisfies




           (M should be taken from an applicable design code.

              This paragraph is not applicable to tubular joints.

        b)   A Miner sum (4.3.1) equal to D=0.5 using a FAT fatigue class according to
                (3.2) of FAT 36 for steel or FAT 12 for aluminium corresponds to a fatigue
                   life greater than 10 million cycles.

        c)     For a detail for which a constant amplitude fatigue limit )FR,L is specified
             and all design stress ranges are under the design resistance fatigue limit



        d)     For a crack, at which all design stress intensity factors are under the threshold
                level )Kth for crack propagation.





                                     page 14
